>> A groundbreaking new
experiment shows the power
of the mind to influence matter.
This is Gaia News.
The Institute of Noetic
Sciences founded in 1973
by astronaut Edgar
Mitchell has for decades
been at the forefront
of scientific research
into psychic phenomena and
the nature of consciousness.
Much of their study
has been around
psychophysical phenomena, or
the ways in which our mind
or consciousness affects the
physical world of matter.
In a new experiment, scientists
added a novel element
from the world of quantum
physics, which may
prove to be quite significant.
Dr. Dean Radin is the chief
scientist at IONS and head
of the study.
>> It has been said that there
are strange things associated
with quantum mechanics that are
very similar to strange things
associated with
psychic phenomena.
The two things in
quantum mechanics
that are often called
weird because they're
strange involve a property
called nonlocality,
which means that objects--
even though they're
separated in space--
are somehow still connected.
This is what Einstein called
"spooky action at a distance."
And it took roughly 60
years for scientists
to figure out ways of
telling whether or not
things really were
connected in a nonlocal way.
So now we not only know
that that is a fact,
but there are
technologies that are
being used that use this
property of nonlocality.
So that's one thing.
The second thing in
the quantum mechanics
is the notion that the observer,
simply by observing a system,
can change its behavior.
There's some kinds
of systems that
can be set up, like optical
systems, where if you observe
where a photon goes in
the optical system, then
the photon's
behavior will change.
And it's not because you're
interfering with the photon.
It has something to do with
extracting information out
of the optical system.
>> In this latest experiment,
researchers explored this
observer effect by setting
up an optical system in which
participants observed for the
first time a set of nonlocal
entangled photons.
>> When you look at the history
of studies on mind-matter
interaction, the mental part
is always nonlocal in the sense
that your mind is going
to influence something
at a distance.
But if you look at
the kinds of targets
that have been studied--
and it's a very wide
range, everything
from photons and electrons
to water to human behavior
to random events, a huge range--
all of those targets are local.
This new experiment
involving entangled photons
is, by definition, a
nonlocal matter target.
It's hunks of matter-- or energy
in this case-- with photons
that are nonlocally connected.
We used a device that
actually produced
about 1,000 entangled
photons per second.
And so we're interested in
does a nonlocal mind interact
with nonlocal matter.
>> In the experiment,
participants were instructed
to focus their attention on a
computer screen in which were
projected entangled photons,
which appeared as a line graph.
When the line
appeared, they were
told to try to make it
go up with their mind.
And when it disappeared, to
withdraw their attention.
The degree to which participants
were able to affect the photons
was a measure of the
degree to which they
were affecting the strength
of the photon's entanglement.
The results, while
preliminary, were compelling.
>> So entanglement is not
an all-or-one phenomenon.
There's a spectrum.
So a very, very
weak entanglement--
if you just go
below the weakness--
it's classical particles.
They are two particles, which
are completely separate.
The moment they
become entangled,
they share properties, even
though they're separate.
And so the degree
to which they share
those properties, the strength
of it, that can be modulated.
So we wanted to see,
could the mind modulate
nonlocal entanglements.
And so to make a very long
story short, the answer is yes.
So what we found
was that when people
were asked to focus
their attention
towards the
entangled photons, we
found that the entanglement
strength increased.
>> What are the implications
of this finding?
>> This actually has interesting
pragmatic consequences
because in technologies
that are using entanglement,
the fidelity of the
entanglement is very important.
It's difficult to
maintain entanglement.
It's kind of a
fragile phenomenon.
So when you're creating
quantum computing or quantum
cryptography or a range
of many other times
of quantum-based
technologies, a lot of effort
is used to maintain the
quantumness of the connections.
Well, if it turns out
that simply focusing
your mind towards
these quantum objects
maintains the fidelity,
especially entanglement
fidelity, that is doing
what is necessary in order
to make these things work.
So you could project
then that if we
get really good at
this kind of task, then
we can make quantum computers
work better simply by focusing
our mind towards it.
>> Beyond these potentially
revolutionary applications,
there's an even greater
implication of this research.
>> When your intention
is focused on something,
it's not just in your head.
It's aspects of the
world are changing.
So the most interesting
thing about this experiment
is that the aspect
of the world that
changed, we think
in this experiment,
has to do with
entanglement, which
is the-- you can think of
it as a very deep element
of the fabric of reality.
But if, in fact, the mind
can influence to that level,
the current ideas
within physics is
that our notions of space and
time themselves, those things
are not fundamentals,
as we already
know from relativity theory.
But they're actually
emerged out of entanglement.
So if entanglement seems to
be a more fundamental way
of thinking about the nature
of reality, and that gives
rise to space and time.
So if your mind can
influence entanglement,
it means that you can warp
space and time itself.
>> Further investigations are
forthcoming and could lead not
only to dramatic technological
advancements but to a deeper
understanding of the
very fabric of reality.
For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.